align definitions scripts with typical git behavior, add docs (#735)
FAIRmat-NFDI/pynxtools: docs/learn/pynxtools/nexus-definitions.md

# NeXus definitions in pynxtools

## Overview

`pynxtools` converts experimental data into the NeXus format and validates the resulting files against NeXus application definitions. These definitions formally describe how experimental data and metadata must be structured in a NeXus file.

The NeXus definitions themselves are not part of the pynxtools source code. Instead, they are maintained in a dedicated repository and included in pynxtools as a Git submodule:

```bash
src/pynxtools/definitions
```

This page explains:

- what the definitions repository contains,

- why it is included as a submodule,

- how it is used inside `pynxtools`,

- and how to manage it using the provided helper script.

## What the NeXus definitions are

NeXus defines a standardized structure for scientific data. The structure is described in XML files written in the NeXus Definition Language (NXDL), which define:

- base classes (common structural components),
- application definitions (experiment-specific schemas),
- contributed definitions from the community. These can be base classes or application definitions.

> These definitions specify naming, hierarchy, required concepts, and allowed metadata for NeXus files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These definitions specify naming, hierarchy, requireness constraints, and allowed metadata for NeXus files.
```

```bash
scripts/definitions.sh
```

The script provides a small abstraction over common Git submodule operations and ensures that:

- the correct definitions version is checked out,
- `.gitmodules` remains consistent,
- `nexus-version.txt` is updated automatically.

### Commands

- **Update to the tracked branch**:
  
    ```bash
    ./scripts/definitions.sh update
    ```

    Updates the definitions submodule to the latest commit of the tracked branch (if configured). Internally this runs: `git submodule update --remote`. Use this when you intentionally want to move to a newer definitions version.

- **Reset to the recorded version**:
  
    ```bash
    ./scripts/definitions.sh reset
    ```

    Resets the submodule to the exact commit recorded in the `pynxtools` repository.
    This is the safe operation when you want to switch branches, discard local experiments,
    or restore a clean state.

    Importantly, this does not update to the latest definitions version. It restores the version pinned by the current `pynxtools` commit.

- **Checkout a specific revision**:
  
    ```bash
    ./scripts/definitions.sh checkout <REV>
    ```
    

>     `<REV>` can be any any Git ref resolvable by `git rev-parse` (e.g., a commit hash, a tag, or a branch name).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    `<REV>` can be any Git reference that is resolvable by `git rev-parse` (e.g., a commit hash, a tag, or a branch name).
```
